My work dealt with the looking at the range extremes of deciduous trees, and their relative dominance across a latitudinal gradient. The gradient ranged from the sites including Harvard Forest (the southernmost site), the White Mountains in New Hampshire, northern New Hampshire at the Dartmouth college second grant site, to the northernmost point in St. Hippolyte, Quebec. Overall the data yielded no significant values, yet there was a trend across all sites showing that of the 6 species we studied, the species that reached their northernmost range extreme along the gradient showed a downward trend in dominance compared to other species, while the one species we had that went away from its southern range limit at Harvard Forest (Betula papyrifera) showed an uptick in dominance as we went north. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that trees decrease in dominance as they approach their northern range limits.

The significance of this in the context of global warming is quite large; if trees cannot make up at their northern limits for population loss on their southern edges due to warming temperatures, they may not be able to migrate as quickly as hoped, or as is necessary for the species to survive.

My daily work over the summer consisted of predominantly field work. Every day, I would pick an individual previously tagged by the lab (though occasionally I had to find new ones), measure out a circle of 5m radius, then work in a clock-like motion around the focal individual. I measured the DBH of each of the trees around the focal individual, and marked presence/absence of species in the understory (including saplings).

I definitely enjoyed the day-to-day work (especially learning how to identify plants). I think I would have benefited from a little direction at the beginning in terms of what key words to look for in searches for literature, and more directed reading assignments to more fully grasp on what basis I was founding my experiment. This could have taken the form of earlier help with the proposal at the beginning of the summer. I mostly worked independently (Dan and Martha came out to the Forest on average once/week). It definitely would have been good to start outlining data analyses early, within the first few weeks. It helps with data input on the computer, as well as decreasing stress later in the summer. Mostly, I needed some more help understanding the fundamental concepts earlier that I was supposed to be examining with the experiment. I could have done this had I been more on top of my own independent research, but especially when I’m working on my own for most of the time some sort of timeline and reading assignments that Dan thought were important would have been nice to have.
